Welcome to this talk,
I'm Glen Mével, and with
Jacques-Henri Jourdan
and François Pottier,
we've been working on
a concurrent separation logic
for Multicore OCaml
What does that mean?
Our aim is to verify,
fine-grained concurrent programs
in the setting
of the Multicore
OCaml memory model,
which is a weak memory model.
In this talk,
I present a concurrent
separation logic
with a notion of views.
So a few words about
Multicore Ocaml:
as the name suggests,
it is an extension
of the OCaml
programming language
with support
for multicore programming.
It comes with a weak memory model
which has been formalized
in a paper at PLDI '18,
and it features
two flavors of locations
which are dubbed "atomic" and "non-atomic".
By the way if you're interested
in the garbage collector
of Multicore OCaml,
please have a look
at this other ICFP paper, whose title is
"Retrofitting
Parallelism onto OCaml."
So what is the challenge here?
Essentially, the challenge
is dealing with
the weak memory.
Under sequential consistency,
traditional concurrent
separation logic
gives you a points-to assertion,
"x points to V"
which expresses your
unique ownership
of the memory location x
and which also
says which value
is stored in x.
Then you have the usual
Hoare-style reasoning rules.
This assertion
gives you ownership of x
but you may
want to share
this ownership
among all threads.
To do so, an usual solution
is to put the assertion
in an invariant.
Intuitively an invariant
holds at all times,
and its contents
can be accessed equally
by all threads.
Here, we can put
"x points to something"
in an invariant
(which we denote
by boxing the assertion),
then any thread
can access x as long as
it preserves the invariant.
Now, what breaks
under a weak memory model
is that each thread
now has a different
view of memory.
This notion of view
is crucial, because it means
that some assertions
like the points-to assertion
are only valid
with respect
to the current view of a thread.
We call these kinds
of assertions
subjective assertions.
But on the other hand,
invariants hold
equally for all threads,
so they can only contain
objective assertions
where by objective
we mean non-subjective.
Then the challenge
is to keep a program logic
which feels simple
and natural enough
but at the same time
is able to deal
with subjectivity,
and allows
subjective assertions
to be shared between threads.
I just spoke about the view
of a thread and how it is
central to the challenge
of weak memory,
but I haven't defined
this concept yet,
so let me do that now.
Because of weak memory
each thread only knows
a subset of all writes
that have happened
to the shared memory.
This affects how
a thread reads
and writes the memory.
For example,
once it has learned
about a write,
it cannot read
from earlier writes anymore.
This is an example
of what a weak
memory model would say you.
And this subset of write events,
we will call it a view.
So the view of a thread
is the set of
write events it knows about.
Now, we want to manipulate
these views from the logic.
For that, we add new
kinds of assertions.
The first new kind
of assertions is
this "up-arrow U"
where U is a view,
we pronounce it
as "we have seen U",
and it means that
the current thread
knows all writes in U.
So it is an assertion
about the current view
of the thread.
The second
new assertion is "P at U",
where P
is an assertion
and U is a view.
It means that P holds in the eyes
of any thread
which has seen U.
For example, let's say
that P relies
on knowing
a given write event.
Then it requires the current view
to contain that write event.
So asserting P is subjective.
But instead we're going to
say that whatever
the current view is,
if it contains
that write event,
then P holds.
And by saying this, we do not
depend anymore on the current view.
So saying this is objective,
even though P
may be subjective.
And that's what
"P at U" means when
U contains the given write event.
So we can make
a subjective assertion objective
by specifying the view
at which we see it.
And why is it
interesting?
Because these new
assertions are complementary.
More precisely, in our logic,
any assertion P
is equivalent
to an objective assertion
of the form "P at U",
and a assertion of the form,
"up-arrow U",
for some view U.
This shows in particular
that view assertions
of the form "up-arrow U"
capture all the
subjectivity of the
weak memory.
And this decomposition will allow us
to share subjective assertions
between threads, by using
a different mechanism for each part.
The first part, "P at U",
is objective
so it can be shared via an invariant,
just as in usual
concurrent separation logics.
Regarding the second part,
sharing "up-arrow U"
means exchanging information
about write events between threads.
So in other words,
it means synchronizing.
So we will rely on some form
of thread synchronization
that is provided by the memory model.
That was the main idea of this talk.
Now I show you what is
in our program logic,
to reason about programs and memory,
and I'll start with the simplest thing,
which are atomic locations.
For atomic locations,
we have an usual-looking
points-to assertion,
"atomic x points to v",
which means that we own the
atomic location x,
and x stores the value v.
We are able to say such a thing,
because atomic locations
in Multicore OCaml
behave in a sequentially consistent way.
At any given time,
all threads see the same value for x.
In particular,
this assertion is objective,
then it should come as no surprise
that atomic accesses obey the usual
Hoare triples, both reads and writes.
Where things become interesting,
is for non-atomic locations.
The non-atomic locations of Multicore
OCaml have a relaxed behavior.
In our logic we still have
an assertion "x points to v",
with its meaning differ slightly.
It still asserts the ownership of x,
but instead of saying that
the value of x is v,
it says that we have seen
the latest write to x,
and this write bears the value v.
And this is the typical
subjective assertion.
There is no such a thing as
the global value of x,
because different threads
do not necessarily know
about the same writes to x.
What is really nice with
this points-to assertion,
is that it also obeys the standard rules.
So we have a simple looking assertion
that behaves in a natural way,
but the price for it
is that the assertion
hides more behind the scenes
and it is subjective.
So we cannot share it
only by using an invariant.
So let's see how
we can share it nonetheless,
and for that,
let's consider that typical code pattern
which is called a spin lock.
Let's say we have several threads,
that want to access the same resource,
such as a single non-atomic location.
Then we can use an atomic
flag to guard that resource:
when the flag is true,
the resource is taken,
and if you want to acquire it,
you need to wait for
it to become available.
Now from a logical point of view,
the lock can be seen as
guarding an assertion P,
which may be subjective,
for example,
it may be a non-atomic
points-to assertion,
as evoked just before.
The first thread has P
before releasing the lock.
The second thread will get P
after it has acquired the lock.
So we want P to be transferred
from the first thread to the second one.
To see how that works,
let's consider
only the compare-and-set
operation that succeeds,
because that's when the transfer happens.
As we've seen we decompose
P into an objective part
and a subjective part,
so that we can transfer each part.
The first part, "P at U", is objective.
So it can be transferred
using an invariant as usual.
So we get rid of it.
So now we are down to the problem
of transferring a view assertion.
As I said before,
we need some form of
synchronization and, here,
What Multicore OCaml gives us
is a happens-before relationship
from the release write
to the acquire read.
So instead of adding
new primitives to the language,
Multicore OCaml made the choice
of performing release/acquire
synchronization on atomic access.
We need to reflect
this in our program logic,
and we do so
by extending the atomic
points-to predicate.
So recall that "atomic points to v"
means that x stores the value v.
We now extend this assertion,
so that an atomic location stores the pair
of a value and a view.
So accesses still behave the same
with respect to the value,
but they also perform a
release/acquire synchronization
on the view.
So when writing,
we push into the shared location,
any information we have in the local view.
So that's a release write.
And conversely,
when reading, we pull into our local view
any information stored
in the shared location.
So that's an acquire read.
And with this in mind,
let's come back to our spin lock.
As we have seen before,
the spin lock has two operations,
release and acquire.
In the interface it guards an assertion P.
We give the spin lock a specification,
which holds under some invariant.
And now,
to prove this specification in
the usual separation logic,
with sequential consistency,
we state an invariant like this:
we are either locked or unlocked,
and in the latter case
the invariant itself holds the assertion P.
Now in our program
logic with weak memory,
P may be subjective,
but everything in the
invariant has to be objective.
So the invariant we
state instead is that one.
In fact,
it is the same as in
usual separation logic,
but we add views.
To remain objective,
we make it explicit
at which view we have P,
and we say that it is the same view
as is stored in lk.
In other words,
P holds in the eyes of whoever
last released the lock.
So that "P at U" in the invariant
obviously allows to transfer
the objective part of P,
while the atomic location itself
allows to transfer the
subjective part of P.
So that was the proof of the spin lock.
And in addition to this example,
we did more case studies with
different kinds of locks
and algorithms for mutual exclusion,
and in all of these examples,
we have been experiencing the same pattern
of sprinkling views over our invariants.
So a general method
for proving correctness
of a concurrent data structure,
is to start by reasoning
as if we had a sequentially
consistent model,
express the invariant in the usual
concurrent separation logic.
Then identify where
synchronization happens,
and make it explicit by adding views.
To sum up I have presented
a program logic
for Multicore OCaml,
based on isolating
subjectivity into views.
I argued that this logic enables concise
and natural reasoning on
how threads synchronize.
There is more in the paper,
namely how the logic is realized,
by building on top of a lower-level logic.
And we also have more case studies.
This entire work is mechanized
in the Coq proof assistant,
using the Iris separation logic framework.
So we have a verified proof of soundness,
and a toy language with
which we can write programs
and prove them correct using
our program logic.
And in the future,
we would like to verify
even more data structures.
Also we would like to
investigate data races,
because data races are currently
not supported in logic,
even though the underlying memory model
gives a few guarantees about them.
Thank you for your attention,
and if you have seen all previous slides,
you hold the right to
ask questions now.